
		FreeRadius as a proxy radius server.


0. INTRODUCTION

  It is possible to use FreeRadius as a proxy radius server. This
  means that it can consult a remote radius server to validate a user.
  This is handy for roaming setups, or for renting ports to someone else.

1. FILES


  If a user logs in with a defined realm syntax, the "realm" portion is
  matched against the configuration to determine how the request should
  be handled.  Common realm formats are:

                username@realm
                realm/username
  
  The realms are configured in two places.  The first place is the
  file /etc/raddb/proxy.conf, which is included by radiusd.conf.  The
  second place is from the /etc/raddb/realms file.  The formats and
  sample configurations are included as comments in the respective
  files.  The preferred ( as it is more flexible for future options )
  file is proxy.conf.  It is not recommended to use both, as that could
  cause confusion.

  All accounting data for proxied requests does NOT get stored in the
  standard logfiles, but in a seperate directory. The name of this
  directory is the name of the remote radius server, and if you want you
  can define a nickname for it in /etc/raddb/naslist just as for normal NASes.

  If you use the /etc/raddb/realms file to enter realm configurations you will
  need to add the hostname and secret for the remote server in the
  file /etc/raddb/clients. On the remote server you need to add the
  hostname of your server and the same secret to /etc/raddb/clients as well.

  The realm "DEFAULT" (without the quotes) matches all realms.

  If you set the remoteserver to "LOCAL", the request will be handled
  locally as usual, without sending it to a remote radius server.

  The realm "NULL" matches any requests WITHOUT a realm.

  There are several options you can add in both files:

  - nostrip:
    By default the realm is stripped from the username before sending it
    on to the remote radius server. By specifying the "nostrip" option
    the @realm suffix will not be stripped.
  - hints
    By default the original username is sent to the remote radius
    server. By specifying the "hints" option the username will be
    sent as it is after the "hints" file was processed.
  - notrealm:
    By default if a realm is matched, it will be proxied to the server
    specified.  However, if you are using Replication functionality, you
    may want to override this behaviour.  This option will prevent a
    user who enters 'user@foobar' from being proxied if the 'foobar'
    realm configuration contains 'notrealm'.  This function used to be
    called 'notsuffix', and the old syntax is still supported.

2. WHAT HAPPENS

  The exact thing that happens is this:

  - A user logs in with a realm
  - The hints file gets processed as usual
  - The user is checked against the huntgroups file. At this point
    the user _might_ already be rejected.
  - The realm is looked up in the realms file. If it isn't defined,
    the users file is processed normally.
  - If the 'notrealm' option is defined, the user is processed
    locally.
  - The realm is stripped from the username unless "nostrip" was
    set, and the request is sent to a remote radius server. Note that
    any stripping done in the hints file doesn't have an effect on the
    username sent to the remote radius server unless you set the
    "hints" option.
  - The remote server replies with ACK or REJECT

    On ACK:       The initial Auth-Type is set to Accept
    On REJECT:    The initial Auth-Type is set to Reject

    The remote server also replies with a set of attributes. For security,
    all attributes are stripped except:

    Service-Type
    Framed-Protocol
    Filter-Id
    Framed-MTU
    Framed-Compression
    Login-Service
    Reply-Message
    Session-Timeout
    Idle-Timeout
    Port-Limit

    Then the users file is processed as usual. The username used at
    this point is the one after hints file processing (regardless of
    the "hints" option). It also includes the realm (regardless of the
    setting of the "nostrip" option) unless the realm is LOCAL.

