  This directory contains scripts to create the server certificates.
To make a set of default (i.e. test) certificates, simply type:

$ make

  The "openssl" command will be run against the sample configuration
files included here, and will make certificates for a certificate
authority (i.e. root CA), and a server certificate.

  The Microsoft "XP Extensions" will be automatically included in the
server certificate.  Without those extensions Windows clients will
refuse to authenticate to FreeRADIUS.

  When deploying the server in a real environment (i.e. NOT a test
environment), perform the following steps in this directory

$ make distclean

  This command removes all of the "test" certificates.


		MAKING A ROOT CERTIFICATE


$ vi ca.cnf

  Edit the "input_password" and "output_password" fields to be the
  password for the CA certificate.

  Edit the [certificate_authority] section to have the correct values
  for your country, state, etc.

$ make ca.pem

  This step creates the CA certificate.



		MAKING A SERVER CERTIFICATE


$ vi server.cnf

  Edit the "input_password" and "output_password" fields to be the
  password for the server certificate.

  Edit the [server] section to have the correct values for your
  country, state, etc.  Be sure that the commonName field here is
  different from the commonName for the CA certificate.

$ make server.pem

  This step creates the server certificate.

  If you have an existing certificate authority, and wish to create a
  certificate signing request for the server certificate, edit
  server.cnf as above, and type the following command.

$ make server.csr

  You will have to ensure that the certificate contains the XP
  extensions needed by Microsoft clients.


		MAKING A CLIENT CERTIFICATE


  Client certificates are used by EAP-TLS, and optionally by EAP-TTLS
and PEAP.  The following steps outline how to create a client
certificate that is signed by the server certificate created above.
You will have to have the password for the server certificate in the
"input_password" and "output_password" fields of the server.cnf file.


$ vi client.cnf

  Edit the "input_password" and "output_password" fields to be the
  password for the client certificate.  You will have to give these
  passwords to the end user who will be using the certificates.

  Edit the [client] section to have the correct values for your
  country, state, etc.  Be sure that the commonName field here is
  the User-Name that will be used for logins!

$ make client.pem

  The users certificate will be in "commonName.pem",
  i.e. "user@example.com.pem".

  To create another client certificate, just repeat the steps for
  making a client certificate, being sure to enter a different login
  name for "commonName", and a different password.
